ebook-folder/docs/additionalResources/interviewChallenges.md, before:

# Interview Challenges

## Train for Interviews?

Interviewing for development jobs is tough! To prepare you for the challenges ahead we will practice whiteboarding in front of the class every day. Think of it as a warm-up for the project that awaits. The whiteboarding challenges should be taken seriously and practiced even outside of class. Help yourself by following these steps to attack the problem, work through the problem and collaborate with your interviewer (instructor):

- [ ] Restate the question aloud.
- [ ] Write the question out at the top of the whiteboard.
- [ ] Ask any clarifying questions you need.
- [ ] Invoke the function and write out the expected output given the sample input. If none is given, make it up.
Write out a code plan to the side of the whiteboard.
Speak aloud every thought you have. THIS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT PART!
- [ ] Build the structure of your function(s).
- [ ] Slowly work through your code plan, building the steps you need.
- [ ] Don't be afraid to mess up and say it aloud.
- [ ] It's not about finding the solution. It's about collaborating and working toward a solution!
- [ ] After you finish, take a picture and transfer it to a Repl.it when you get home.

1. **PROMPT: Two Eggs and 100 Floors** - The following is a description of this famous puzzle involving 2 eggs and a building with 100 floors. Suppose that we wish to know which stories in a 100-story building are safe to drop eggs from, and which will cause the eggs to break on landing. What strategy should be used to drop eggs such that the total number of drops in the worst case is minimized and we find the required floor?

  > We may make a few assumptions:
    > - An egg that survives a fall can be used again.
    > - A broken egg must be discarded.
    > - The effect of a fall is the same for all eggs.
    > - If an egg breaks when dropped, then it would break if dropped from a higher floor.
    > - If an egg survives a fall then it would survive a shorter fall.

2. **PROMPT: Hourglasses Puzzle** - How do you measure 9 minutes from a 4 minute-glass and a 7 minute-glass?

  > We have only 2 sand timers: 4 minutes and 7 minutes but we need to measure 9 minutes. How do we do it?
  
Class 5:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 6:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 7:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 8:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 9:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 10:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 11:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 12:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 13:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 14:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 15:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 16:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 17:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 18:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 19:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 20:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*

  <!-- Estimated readtime functionality for a web page -->

Commit message:

finished class 3 and object lesson

ebook-folder/docs/additionalResources/interviewChallenges.md, after:

# Interview Challenges

## Train for Interviews?

Interviewing for development jobs is tough! To prepare you for the challenges ahead we will practice whiteboarding in front of the class every day. Think of it as a warm-up for the project that awaits. The whiteboarding challenges should be taken seriously and practiced even outside of class. Help yourself by following these steps to attack the problem, work through the problem and collaborate with your interviewer (instructor):

- [ ] Restate the question aloud.
- [ ] Write the question out at the top of the whiteboard.
- [ ] Ask any clarifying questions you need.
- [ ] Invoke the function and write out the expected output given the sample input. If none is given, make it up.
Write out a code plan to the side of the whiteboard.
Speak aloud every thought you have. THIS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT PART!
- [ ] Build the structure of your function(s).
- [ ] Slowly work through your code plan, building the steps you need.
- [ ] Don't be afraid to mess up and say it aloud.
- [ ] It's not about finding the solution. It's about collaborating and working toward a solution!
- [ ] After you finish, take a picture and transfer it to a Repl.it when you get home.

- [ ] Class 1. **PROMPT: Two Eggs and 100 Floors** - The following is a description of this famous puzzle involving 2 eggs and a building with 100 floors. Suppose that we wish to know which stories in a 100-story building are safe to drop eggs from, and which will cause the eggs to break on landing. What strategy should be used to drop eggs such that the total number of drops in the worst case is minimized and we find the required floor?

  > We may make a few assumptions:
    > - An egg that survives a fall can be used again.
    > - A broken egg must be discarded.
    > - The effect of a fall is the same for all eggs.
    > - If an egg breaks when dropped, then it would break if dropped from a higher floor.
    > - If an egg survives a fall then it would survive a shorter fall.

- [ ] Class  2. **PROMPT: Hourglasses Puzzle** - How do you measure 9 minutes from a 4 minute-glass and a 7 minute-glass?

  > We have only 2 sand timers: 4 minutes and 7 minutes but we need to measure 9 minutes. How do we do it?
  
- [ ] Class 3: **PROMPT: Take an array of numbers, raise each number by the power of two and return the sum of the new array.**

```javascript
  const myArr = [ 1, 2, 3]

  sumOfPoweredByTwo(myArr) // --> 14
```


Class 5:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 6:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 7:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 8:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 9:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 10:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 11:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 12:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 13:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 14:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 15:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 16:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 17:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 18:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 19:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*
Class 20:
  Prompt 1: *todo*
  Prompt 2: *todo*

  <!-- Estimated readtime functionality for a web page -->
